---
title: Ethometric museum
description: 'Appearing to be artefacts from a hitherto unknown branch of science, Ethometric Instruments are curious, fascinating relics from a bygone age.'
project_date: 2011-04-01 00:00:00
project_to_date: 2006-12-01 00:00:00
list: true
archive: false
main_image_path: /assets/ethometric-museum2.jpg
video_embed: '<iframe width="960" height="720" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/a1A43yG--Vk?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>'
images:
  - image_path: /assets/ethometric-stav-door.jpg
    description:
  - image_path: /assets/ethometric-museum.jpg
    description:
  - image_path: /assets/ethometric-museum2.jpg
    description:
  - image_path: /assets/ethometric-museum-ray.jpg
    description:
  - image_path: /assets/ethometer-crop.jpg
    description:
  - image_path: /assets/ethomagnetron.jpg
    description:
  - image_path: /assets/ethometric-recorder.jpg
    description:
tags:
  - home
order: 2
---


*The Ethometric Museum* consists of a collection of apparently authentic vintage electronic instruments and devices called ‘Ethometric Instruments’. These arcane devices, of which there are over forty, are displayed on a series of museum or store room shelves and the audience are led into the space and are free to move around as they please. At the beginning of the performance a Curator introduces the collection to the audience, giving a fictional history of the company that made the instruments and of their possible use and function. After this the ‘professor’ enters and activates the instruments, all of which produce a sound. Using these sounds a composition is performed.

> Utterly wonderful
> <br>Sumit Paul-Choudhury, editor New Scientist magazine

Enter the *Ethometric Museum* and be transported into a parallel universe of cosmic tones and esoteric technology, an Aladdin’s cave of exquisitely hand- crafted contraptions.&nbsp;

Inside you will bathe in the resonant sound waves generated by the spinning machines and dancing automata and marvel as Professor Lee flicks the knobs and tunes the dials to play an innovative musical soundscape that envelops you like a ‘three dimensional piece by Steve Reich’.

According to the introduction given to you by the earnest and elegantly dressed curator, Dr. Kounadea, each machine emits specific harmonic frequencies and through their precise manipulation Ethometrics ‘expert’ Professor Lee will realign your ‘super-electrical field’.&nbsp;

Appearing to be artefacts from a hitherto unknown branch of science, these extraordinary Ethometric Instruments are curious, fascinating and beguiling relics from a bygone age. Fascinating, compelling and hauntingly beautiful, *Ethometric Museum* is an immersive theatrical journey into a hypnotic and mesmerising world of whirling devices, pulsing drones and proper science.&nbsp;

Selected Press

> A kind of musical H.G.Wells - Ivan Hewitt BBC Radio 3

> Witty, strange and beautiful...For total strangeness see Ray Lee’s Ethometric Museum. - Lyn Gardner, Guardian&nbsp;

> Gentle, whimsical and resonant with beauty - Glasgow Herald \*\*\*\*

> If you’re after something different, Ethometric Museum will take your breath away - Three Weeks\*\*\*\*

> A strange, alien, ever changing sound world, at once beguiling and disconcerting - What’s on Stage \*\*\*\*
> <br>&nbsp;

**Technical:**

The score for *The Ethometric Museum* contains a description of all of the instruments and the sound that they make. The majority of the instruments are 12v DC, with a small number being run off mains voltage. All of the instruments are completely independent of each other and produce their own distinctive sound with integral loudspeakers. The sound generation is produced by a variety of means: pitched electronic tones that can be individually tuned and pulsed; amplified metal plates with built in sound processing; digital sound stores with amplitude control; rotating devices replaying digital sound; sound stores broadcasting the sound through electro-magnetic coils and received and amplified by similar coils.

**Touring and restaging:**

2011

- Museum of the History of Science, Oxford

- BEAM sound art festival, Brunel University, London

- Cellar of Mason’s Lodge, Hill Street Theatre, Edinburgh

- The Old Library, South Hill Park Arts Centre, Bracknell

2012

- Council Chamber, Battersea Arts Centre, London

- Gravity Fields Festival Grantham

- Natural Science Society, Bournemouth Arts Festival

- Alms House, Corsham Festival

- Tesla Museum, Belgrade, Serbia, supported by the British Council

2013

- Ashmolean Museum Oxford

-Science Museum, London

**Supported by:**

Arts Council England, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford Contemporary Music

**Broadcasts:**

*Hear and Now*, BBC Radio 3, December 2011.

**Awards:**

BASCA British Composer of the Year for Sonic Art 2012

**Credits:**

Performers: ‘The Curator’; Stavroula Kounadea (Graham Elstone for four performances in Oxford). ‘The Professor’; Ray Lee, Harry Dawes (for certain performances in Oxford and Edinburgh)

The curator’s role was developed in collaboration with Stavroula Kounadea.

Additional technical assistance: Graham Calvert

Produced by Oxford Contemporary Music